Added typescript generics post (#86)
unicorn-utterances/unicorn-utterances: content/blog/typescript-type-generics/index.md

```

In this case, we want to make sure that every possible input type is available for the prop type. Let's take a look at a few potential solutions, with their various pros and cons, and see if we can find a solution that fits the requirements for providing typing for a function like this.

## Potential Solution 1: Unions {#generic-usecase-setup-union-solution}

One potential solution to this problem might be TypeScript unions. _Unions allow us to define an `or` condition of sorts for our types_. As we want to allow various types for inputs and outputs, perhaps that can help us here!

Using this method, if we wanted to accept numbers, we could add that as a union:

```typescript
function returnProp(returnProp: string | number): string | number {
	return returnProp;
}

returnProp('Test'); // ✅ This is fine
const shouldBeNumber = returnProp(4); // ✅ This won't show errors now
```

However, unions have some limitations. You'll find that this doesn't give the example you might want:

```typescript
// ❌ This will yield an error
// > Operator '+' cannot be applied to types '4' and 'string | number'.
const newNumber = shouldBeNumber + 4;
```

> The reason that the operation `shouldBeNumber + 4` yields this error is because it doesn't know which type to give you given your input, since the output is also explicitly a union (meaning that it could be a string OR a number returned — one of them supporting numeric operations, one of them not).

Reviewer: This is kinda hard to read. Maybe split this up differently and use "TypeScript doesn't know" and the variable name to reference existing subjects instead?

Author: ```suggestion
The reason that the operation `shouldBeNumber + 4` yields this error is because you've told TypeScript that `shouldBeNumber` is either a number **or** a string by making the output explicitly typed as a union. As a result, TypeScript is unable to do addition between a number and a string (which is one of the potential values) and therefore throws an error.
```

### Potential Solutions Disclaimer {#silly-examples-disclaimer}

> Author's note:
>
> If you were using unions in your property definitions and left your return type blank, TypeScript would be able to infer what the return type should be just fine.
>

> > That said, we're trying to build on concepts, so we're trying to provide some examples of where this might be used and what it does. There are also instances, such as type definition files, where this inference might not be available to an author of typings, as well as other limitations with this method that we'll see later,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> That said, we're trying to build on concepts, so we're trying to provide some examples of where this might be used and what it does. There are also instances, such as type definition files, where this inference might not be available to an author of typings, as well as other limitations with this method that we'll see later.
```

```typescript
function returnProp(returnProp: number): number;
function returnProp(returnProp: string): string;
// While this seems repetitive, TS requires it.
// Otherwise, it will complain:
// This overload signature is not compatible with its implementation signature.
function returnProp(returnProp: string | number): string | number {
	return returnProp;
}
```

That said, in addition to having some obnoxious duplicated type information, this method also has its limitations.

For example, if we wanted to pass in an object of some kind (such as `{}`, a simple empty object), it would be invalid:

```typescript
returnProp({}) // Argument of type '{}' is not assignable to parameter of type 'string'.
```

This may seem obvious from the typings, but _we ideally want `returnProp` to accept ANY type because **we aren't using any operations that require knowing the type**._ (no addition or subtraction, requiring a number; no string concatenation that might restrict an object from being passed).

## Potential Solution 3: Any {#generic-usecase-setup-any-solution}

> Of course, we could use the `any` in order to force any input and return type. (Goodness knows I've had my fair share of typing frustrations that ended with a few `any`s in my codebase!)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, we could use the `any` type to force any input and return type. (Goodness knows I've had my fair share of typing frustrations that ended with a few `any`s in my codebase!)
```

```typescript
function returnSelf<T>(returnProp: T): T {
    return returnProp;
}
```

In this example, we're defining a type variable `T`, then telling TS that both the property and the return type should be the same type.

This means that you can use the function like this:

```typescript
const numberVar = returnSelf(2); // T in this instance is `2`, so it's similar to writing `const numberVal: 2 = 2;`

// Likewise, this object is now returned as if it was just placed on the const
const returnedObject = returnSelf({objProperty: 12});

// This will fail, as expected
returnedObject.test();
// This will exist, and TS will know it as a number
returnedObject.objProperty;
```

> Author's note:
>
> The type variable does not need to be called `T`. In fact, while it seems to be commonplace for the community to use single-letter type variable names (often due to the length and complexity of the typings), there are many reasons why more explicit type names should be used.
>

> > Remember, type variables are like other variables in that you need to maintain them and understand what they're doing in your code.

Reviewer: I love this. Thanks for adding this touch. 🙏🙏🙏

Author: I wanted to make sure to bring it up since I think it's important. I want to make sure in more complex articles to move away from  `T` as well, but I think in an intro to generics seeing `T` might help understand conventions and keep an idea of abstract type concepts

# Okay, but Why? {#logger-example}

> Why might we want to do this? [Returning an item as itself in a identity function](#generic-usecase-setup) is cool, but it's not very useful in its current state. That said, there ARE many many uses for generics in real-world codebases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why might we want to do this? [Returning an item as itself in an identity function](#generic-usecase-setup) is cool, but it's not very useful in its current state. That said, there ARE many, many uses for generics in real-world codebases.
```

> Why might we want to do this? [Returning an item as itself in a identity function](#generic-usecase-setup) is cool, but it's not very useful in its current state. That said, there ARE many many uses for generics in real-world codebases.

Reviewer: Are the all-caps words necessary throughout the text?

All-caps text is harder for people with reading disabilities, screen readers often read out each letter separately, and it's an interesting style choice that seems firmer than I would expect from a technical piece that can use rich text to convey the point just as strongly.

Author: You're absolutely right. I should be using bolded text here:

```suggestion
Why might we want to do this? [Returning an item as itself in an identity function](#generic-usecase-setup) is cool, but it's not very useful in its current state. That said, there **are** many, many uses for generics in real-world codebases.
```

For example, let's say that we had the following JavaScript code that we wanted to use as a logger:

```javascript
const util = require('util'),
   	  fs   = require('fs');

// Have the `writeFile` return a promise instead of having to use a callback
const writeFileAsync = util.promisify(fs.writeFile);

/**
 * Async functions allows us to use `await` on promises in the function body, try/catch them, and
 * will return their own promise wrapped around the `return` value
 */
async function logTheValue(item) {
	const jsonString = JSON.stringify(item, null, 2);

	let err = undefined;

	try {
		// Attempt to write a new log file. If this fails, save the error to the `err` variable
		await writeFileAsync(`/logs/${Date.now()}`, jsonString);

> 	} catch (e) {

Author: ```suggestion
      // Catch any errors and keep them as the `e` variable to assign to `err` later
	} catch (e) {
```

> 		err = e;

Reviewer: The manual "hoisting" of `e` to `err` may not be the easiest for some, especially with two shortenings rather than verbose names. Not sure what's best to do here, but in general I like being explicit since `e` is often `event` and `err` saves only two letters.

Author: `error` can be preserved in some instances so I wanted to remove it. I'll add a comment to make it more clear but I don't think I want to change the code too much here

		original: item,
		// If there was no error, return `undefined` here
		err: err
	}
}
```

If we wanted to type the `logTheValue` function, we'd want to make sure to use a type generic for the input parameter `item`. By doing so, we could use that same generic for the return prop of `loggedValue` to ensure they both have the same typing. To do this, we could do so inline:

```typescript
// Because this is an `async` function, we want to wrap the returned type value in a Promise
async function logTheValue<ItemT>(item: ItemT): Promise<{loggedValue: string, original: ItemT, err: Error | undefined}> {
	// ... Function body here
}
```

Alternatively, we could utilize another feature of generics — the ability to pass the type value of the generic manually — and make an interface with a generic and do so there:

```typescript
interface LogTheValueReturnType<originalT> {
  loggedValue: string;
  original: originalT;
  err: Error | undefined;
}

// Notice how we're even wrapping that interface in a built-in type with a generic argument for `Promise`!
async function logTheValue<ItemT>(item: ItemT): Promise<LogTheValueReturnType<ItemT>> {
	// ... Function body here
}
```

> WIth these few features, we're able to utilize much of the functionality of generics. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these few features, we're able to utilize much of the functionality of generics. 
```

```

# Non-Function Generics {#non-function-generics}

As you saw before with the `LogTheValueReturnType` interface — functions aren't the only ones with generics. In addition to using them within functions and interfaces, you can also use them in classes. 

Classes with generics can be particularly helpful for data structures like this:

```typescript
// DataType might want to be a base64 encoded string, a buffer, or an IntArray
class ImageType<DataType> {
	data: DataType;
  height: number;
  width: number;

  constructor(data: DataType, height: number, width: number) {
		this.data = data;
		this.height = height;
		this.width = width
	};
}

function handleImageBuffer(img: ImageType<Buffer>) {}
```

Type generics in classes can be used as method argument and property types alike.

There's also the ability to use generics within `type` definitions:

```typescript
interface ImageType<DataType> {
	data: DataType;
  height: number;
  width: number;	
}

interface ImageConvertMethods<DataType> {
  // This is the typing of a method. It will take a prop of the generic type and return the generic type
  toPNG: (data: DataType) => DataType;
  toJPG: (data: DataType) => DataType;
}

> type ImageTypeWithConvertMethods<DataType> = ImageType<DataType> & ImageConvertMethods<DataType>

Reviewer: I've noticed some inconsistent indenting in some of these code blocks. I don't have my editor up at the moment, but maybe some find and replace regex would fix this baby right up!

Author: Yeah, I'll be fixing the formatting of the code blocks in the next commit to use tabs as usual :)

```

# Okay, but why-_er_? {#polymorphic-functions}

> Well, "I want to see your credentials" person you, type generics enable us to do things like provide typings for **polymorphic functions**. _Polymorphic functions are functions that can accept a myriad of different types and handle them differently._

Reviewer: I understand you're jokingly referring to the reader, but the particular phrasing `"I want to see your credentials" person you` is confusing because there are three subjects that I can't quite piece together.

Author: Would `Well, you "I want to see your credentials" person you` help?

I wanted to avoid doing `Mr.` or `Ms.`/etc as that opens a frustrating can of assumed gender worms. I might just remove this problem all together and rephrase it

Author: How's this?

```suggestion
My my, you don't seem to take my word for it when I tell you that type generics are useful. That's alright, I suppose; After all, doubt while learning can lead to some great questions! 😉

Type generics enable us to do things like provide typings for **polymorphic functions**. _Polymorphic functions are functions that can accept a myriad of different types and handle them differently._
```

> > Polymorphic functions are not unique to TypeScript, the things learned here about polymorphic functions can be applied to other languages as well. They also provide some real-world insight to usages of generics and when they might be able to be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Polymorphic functions are not unique to TypeScript; the things learned here about polymorphic functions can be applied to other languages as well. They also provide some real-world insight into the usages of generics and when they could be used.
```

> For example, let's take a look at the code for the `toPNG` :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, let's take a look at the code for the `toPNG`:
```

```typescript
function toPNG(data: DataType): DataType {
	if (Buffer.isBuffer(data)) {
		return convertBufferToPNG(data);
	} else if (Array.isArray(data)) {
		const imgBuffer = Buffer.from(data);
		const pngBuffer = convertBufferToPNG(imgBuffer);		
		return Buffer.from(pngBuffer);
	// base64 encoded string
	} else if (typeof data === 'string') {
		const imgBuffer = getBufferFromBaseStr(data);
		const pngBuffer = convertBufferToPNG(imgBuffer);
		return bufferToBase64(pngBuffer);	
	} else {
		throw 'toPNG only accepts arrays, buffers, or strings'
	}
}
```

> Even though this function accepts various data types, it handles them differently under the hood! Functions that have this type of accept-many-handle-each-slightly-differently behavior are called **Polymorphic Functions**. They're particularly useful in utility libraries.

Reviewer: The comma is too important to remove in this longer phrase in my opinion.

```suggestion
Even though this function accepts various data types, it handles them differently under the hood! Functions that have this type of "accept many, handle each slightly differently" behavior are called **Polymorphic Functions**. They're particularly useful in utility libraries.
```

## Broaden Your Horizons {#imperative-casting-extends}

We're also able to keep that type restriction broad within itself. Let's say we had a function that only cared if an object had a specific property on it:

```typescript
interface TimestampReturn<T> {
	isPast: boolean;
	isFuture: boolean;
	obj: T
}
const checkTimeStamp = <T extends {time: Date}>(obj: T): TimestampReturn<T> => {
	let returnVal: TimestampReturn<T> = {
		isPast: false,
		isFuture: false,
		obj
	}
	
	if (obj.time < Date.now()) {
		returnVal.isPast = true;
	} else {
		returnVal.isFuture = true;
	}
	
	return returnVal;
}

```

In this case, we can rely on implicit type casting to ensure that we're able to pass `{time: new Date()}` but not `{}` as values for `obj`.

# Conclusion

And that's all I have for generics! Their usages are far and wide, and now you're able to apply your knowledge in code! We're hoping to have more posts on TypeScript soon - both more introductory and advanced. 

> Questions? Feedback? Sound off in the comments below, we'd love to hear from you!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Questions? Feedback? Sound off in the comments below; we'd love to hear from you!
```

### Potential Solutions Disclaimer {#silly-examples-disclaimer}

> Author's note:
>
> If you were using unions in your property definitions and left your return type blank, TypeScript would be able to infer what the return type should be just fine.
>
> That said, we're trying to build on concepts, so we're trying to provide some examples of where this might be used and what it does. There are also instances, such as type definition files, where this inference might not be available to an author of typings, as well as other limitations with this method that we'll see later,

## Potential Solution 2: Function Overloading {#generic-usecase-setup-overloading-solution}

In order to get around the issues with explicitly returning a union, you _COULD_ utilize function overloading to provide the proper return typings:

```typescript
function returnProp(returnProp: number): number;
function returnProp(returnProp: string): string;
// While this seems repetitive, TS requires it.
// Otherwise, it will complain:
// This overload signature is not compatible with its implementation signature.
function returnProp(returnProp: string | number): string | number {

> 	return returnProp;

Author: Great catch :D

const returnedObject = returnSelf({objProperty: 12}); // This now works! 🎉

returnedObject.test(); // This will not return an error but should 🙁

> console.log(returnedObject.objProperty); // This will also (correctly) not throw an error, but TS will not know it's a number 🙁

Author: I'd like to revert that. I know TS is complaining but that's also sorta the point 😅Having the `returnedObj` on different starting indexes makes this harder to scan

```suggestion
returnedObject.objProperty; // This will also (correctly) not throw an error, but TS will not know it's a number ☹️
```

I also intentionally made the emoji more sad 😜

Reviewer 2: Ok yeah I get that for the `console.log` thing. The emoji was just a bit confusing since at least on linux in FF it only appears in monochrome even though the other one gets color.

In this example, we're defining a type variable `T`, then telling TS that both the property and the return type should be the same type.

This means that you can use the function like this:

```typescript
const numberVar = returnSelf(2); // T in this instance is `2`, so it's similar to writing `const numberVal: 2 = 2;`

// Likewise, this object is now returned as if it was just placed on the const
const returnedObject = returnSelf({objProperty: 12});

// This will fail, as expected
returnedObject.test();
// This will exist, and TS will know it as a number

> console.log(returnedObject.objProperty);

Author: ```suggestion
returnedObject.objProperty;
```

}
```

> If we wanted to add typings for the `logTheValue` function, we'd want to make sure to use a generic for the `loggedValue` <!--Looks like some sentence revisions happened here, not 100% sure what it's supposed to say--> was using the same generic type as `item`. We could do so inline:

Author: ```suggestion
If we wanted to type the `logTheValue` function, we'd want to make sure to use a type generic for the input parameter `item`. By doing so, we could use that same geneeric for the return prop of `loggedValue` to ensure they both have the same typing. To do this, we could do so inline:
```

Reads a lot better

```typescript

> async function logTheValue<ItemT>(item: ItemT): Promise<{loggedValue: string, original: ItemT, err: Error | undefined}> {

Author: Ahh, my bad. Let's add a comment explaining why there's a promise here:

```suggestion
// Because this is an `async` function, we want to wrap the returned type value in a Promise
async function logTheValue<ItemT>(item: ItemT): Promise<{loggedValue: string, original: ItemT, err: Error | undefined}> {
```

}
```

> Alternatively, we could utilize another feature of generics: the ability to pass the type value of the generic manually by making an interface with a generic and doing so there:

Author: ```suggestion
Alternatively, we could utilize another feature of generics — the ability to pass the type value of the generic manually — and make an interface with a generic and do so there:
```

This better preserves the original sentence

  err: Error | undefined;
}

> async function logTheValue<ItemT>(item: ItemT): Promise<LogTheValueReturnType<ItemT>> {

Author: And I think we can even mention this now:

```suggestion
// Notice how we're even wrapping that interface in a built-in type with a generic argument for `Promise`!
async function logTheValue<ItemT>(item: ItemT): Promise<LogTheValueReturnType<ItemT>> {
```

	isFuture: boolean;
	obj: T
}

> const checkTimeStamp = function(obj: T extends {time: Date}): TimestampReturn<T> {

Author: ```suggestion
const checkTimeStamp = (obj: T extends {time: Date}): TimestampReturn<T> => {
```
